The fundamental human attribute is trust. It is what has made our
civilisation dominate the planet: our inherent ability to trust others
and to deliver for those who trust us. That attribute has allowed
relationships to be forged between tribes, between empires, between
civilisations. But, since the mid-1800s, humanity has faced an
existential crisis of trust.

One of the fundamental properties of trust is that it takes time to
forge. If we trusted everyone immediately, our species would have been
eradicated very quickly indeed. But, with globalisation, with people
traversing the globe at an ever-increasing rate, and now with
communications occurring almost instantaneously between people who have
never met, things have changed. It is said that only 7% of human
communication is made of of words, the rest is body language,
positioning, intonation, facial expressions. Yet not one of these can be
conveyed through the media we have in this internet age. How many times
has a text been misinterpreted, a video call frozen, or a phone call cut
out?

If trust is the fundamental quality of humanity as a social species,
then we have interrupted it. We have given rise to mass interactions
over the internet where trust cannot be formed. Online games spend
thousands on anti-hacking software, banks spend millions on server
security, and companies the world over engage dubious firms that claim
to provide anti-ransomware systems, all to try to mitigate the
phenomenon that trust has been lost.

There is no doubt that modernity has brought things that would once have
been considered miracles: penicillin has cured countless diseases,
vaccination has wiped smallpox from the face of the Earth, and the
internet has brought access to knowledge and information to billions.
But it has also created this problem of trust. As with any problem
brought about by the trajectory of modernity, there are two solutions:
go forward, or go back. To go back is to give up the internet, to give up
globalisation, to give up the means for protesters to organise across
the globe in defiance of brutal authoritarian regimes. To go back is to
destroy society as we know it.

To go forward is to brave the unknown. To dive into the depths of the
future and say "we will make it". To have confidence, trust, in not
one, but a billion. To trust the very human race itself, because, if
there is one thing that we have always proven, time and time again, it
is that human innovation is unstoppable. No problem is so
insurmountable, so complex, or so nuanced that the human race, given
time, cannot solve it.

So let us solve the problem of trust, together.

In 2009, when the Bitcoin paper was published, the human race was set on
a course that very few could have predicted: one in which the internet
would begin to solve the problem of trust with mathematics and cryptography. One in which
that which had been removed from human interaction over networks could
be brought back through code. It was called *blockchain*, and it has
begun, slowly, to change the world.

Today, blockchain has become the subject of an unfortunate hype, with
developers focused solely on building applications to take advantage of
this technology, and consumers caught in the middle between thousands of
so-called *cryptocurrencies*, very few of which seem to offer anything
more than a quick buck, if that. Almost no-one has stopped to wonder: is this the
best way to decentralise our society?

To understand this, we must return to the fundamental nature of
decentralisation itself. To decentralise is to remove power from some
central authority, and grant it entirely to the people. Democracy is not
decentralisation, not in most countries, because the vote is ratified by
central authorities. Because the courts can strike down the popular will
at their discretion. Because a central government comprised principally
of money-sucking bureaucrats has overtaken the principle of government
for the people, and by the people. The very notion of 'state secrets'
cannot exemplify this more: a government 'by the people' keeping
secrets from the people. To have trust in decentralised systems is to
somehow ensure that the participants in the system cannot thwart the
system itself, to such an extent that anyone in the system can do
business with any other, without knowing them in person at all. Perhaps
this removes humanity from interactions, but trust takes time:
cryptography does not. If we can provide trust at a mathematical level,
should this not become the default in our globalised world? Already, the
average person has more 'friends' on social media than they have in
real life. In some ways, is this not already the default?

Blockchain provides cryptographic solutions to the problems of trust by
having the subject of trust, a ledger, be stored by everyone, and this
is its first problem: nothing of consequence can be stored on the
ledger. Try to submit a photo archive to a blockchain, and you'd be
bankrupted by the transaction fees. Everyone in the system would have to
store your photos, whether they want to or not. A rather paradoxical
definition of *trust*, don't you think? Further, a blockchain must
have a proof mechanism behind it, by which trust is verified
over time. In Bitcoin, this is called *proof of work*, an algorithm so
energy-intensive that Bitcoin mining in 2019 used as much energy per
annum as the entirety of Spain. In a world wracked by a rapidly
warming climate, this version of trust is a highly short-term one ---
although it may well become the only definition if we all end
up in bunkers, sheltering from volcanic ash and rising seas. While other
proof mechanisms have been proposed, such as *proof of stake*,
[questions have been raised] consistently about their efficacy, and the
extent to which they in fact re-centralise the systems they aim to
decentralise.

Again, not once has anyone considered the logic of disruption, somewhat
startlingly for a group of people so intent on changing the world: the
ultimate form of disruption is to overturn and improve the most basic
fundamental of the system you're looking at.
**Blockchain is broken, and it always will be.** The fundamental
compromises of the system render it infeasible to use it for meaningful
decentralisation: look to the 'smart contracts' of Ethereum, and
notice how their logic must be executed by every single participant in
the network --- complex logic is impossible.

There is no nice way to overturn the work of over a decade of talented
individuals working tirelessly to improve all our lives in the
long-term, but it must be done. Blockchain's time is up, because a
solution to its problems exists. We have called it *The Quantorium*.
This is a network comprised of three pieces: *Lykros*, a system that
ensures the security of data mathematically, such that no-one can change
content without permission, while allowing meaningful collaboration at
the cryptographic level. Lykros is the first system in the world to
provide cryptographic protection for a comprehensive suite of
operations, including, as a world-first: sharing other permissions. The
second piece is *Kolaris*, a decentralised network of nodes that can be
added to or subtracted from automatically, that spans the entire planet.
Anyone can run a node, and anyone can submit data to nodes, without
needing to be part of the network themselves. These nodes store data,
encrypted and controlled with Lykros, and replicate it among themselves
to prevent both faults and lies --- combining the two pieces provides a
system that can be *trusted*. Beyond storage, Kolaris also facilitates
decentralised computation, allowing anyone to tap into the spare
computing resources of the entire planet and compute what they wish,
without needing to control expensive infrastructure themselves. These
features not only decentralise power from existing companies that have
ruled this space for decades, such as Amazon, Google, and Microsoft,
they empower individuals to earn money from these systems through a
price mechanism that ensures both the stability and continuity of the
network. Kolaris is most similar to the *distributed hash tables* of
today, but it is designed from the ground up with dozens of innovative
security mechanisms to protect both the security and integrity of data,
and to allow entirely untrusted nodes to join the network in droves,
without fear of attack.

Further, Kolaris enables *verifiable computation*, whereby an individual
can submit a computation and prove its result to others, through
replication, economic incentives, and cryptography, another world-first
for decentralised systems. This, when combined with the correct
system-specific incentives, facilitates the development of
*decentralised oracles*, a hypothetical 'holy grail' technology that
would allow a decentralised system to communicate reliably with
centralised ones, with no trusted intermediary.

Finally, there is *Miriar*, a true replacement to blockchain that provides a
decentralised ledger replicated across all nodes, for certain tasks that
Kolaris itself cannot perform on its own (such as single-hop, cryptographically
verifiable, infallible routing), without needing any expensive proof
mechanism. Through the ways Kolaris registers nodes in its own system,
information can be propagated to update this ledger using Lykros'
revolutionary *patch-based versioning* algorithm, which allows
cryptographically verifiable additions to data at rates of thousands
per minute, without sacrificing security. Put simply, the proof
mechanisms of blockchains are rendered totally obsolete, while retaining
the exact same level of security, if not a substantially greater one.

Together, these three systems form The Quantorium, a network of
decentralised nodes that will be deployed across the planet to serve the
entire human race. Cryptocurrencies could trivially run on this system,
but they are an afterthought. The goal here is not to earn some
worthless token that the founders use to get rich, the goal is the
genuine, and absolute improvement of the human race, forever. Through
this system, journalists can host materials on decentralised websites
that cannot be censored by authoritarian governments, anonymity can be
ensured for protesters, individuals can organise globally to form
movements to take down the dictatorships of yesteryear, while
companies can offload their infrastructure costs and usher in a new
model of payment, in which users pay for the storage and computation
they need, and the company bears no cost at all. This has been proposed
before, but never with the decentralised technology to meaningfully back
it in the long-term.

The Quantorium is, thus far, the largest innovation in decentralised
technology since the publication of the Bitcoin paper that it aims to
supersede. If this works, there will be thousands of systems working on
old blockchain technology that will be likely abandoned, and many more
that will hopefully transition to this new network. Whether blockchain and
the Quantorium will work side-by-side remains to be seen. But together, the three
protocols that underlie the Quantorium can revolutionise human
interaction over networks, by facilitating the practical verification of
trust at all levels of engagement. A transaction can be ensured, a vote
set in stone, a resource publicly administered.
Transferring the revolutionary principles of *decentralised autonomous
organisations* (DAOs) to this network provides all the benefits they did
on the Ethereum blockchain, but with access to storage and computation
systems that were previously unheard of.

To make this happen, there are four stages: the protocols must be
written, implementations of them must be built, nodes must be run, and
awareness must be raised. The first stage has already been completed:
and the theoretical systems of these protocols have been set down, not
in whitepapers intended to advertise them, but in honest papers of
considerable length that examine in depth every aspect of these systems,
with full mathematical backing. The second stage will take time, but it is
already underway. At present, it is likely that the greatest efficiency
will be achieved by a small team working on these in the open, before
wider contribution is allowed back to the project, and that is what is
happening now.

The final two stages are where we need your help: without you, this
system cannot become a reality, because it is based on *nodes*,
computers that people connect to the network to become part of it. If
you have a device that has an uninterrupted internet connection, and if
you have the internet bandwidth to have that device automatically engage
with clients, and the storage for it to store encrypted data, or the
computation power for it to form part of the computation grid, please
connect it to the Quantorium. This is not a purely altruistic endeavour
either, the Quantorium is built on an infallible payment mechanism that
underlies Kolaris, and you will be compensated for your efforts: not in
some wishy-washy new "altcoin", but in Monero, an
untraceable cryptocurrency built on a proof of work blockchain. That
will allow a cryptocurrency to be built simultaneously with the rest of
the systems, while the final problems are ironed out there, before it
eventually launches. We also do this to make one thing clear: **we are
not in this to get rich, we are in this to improve the world**. If you
expect to earn millions from running a node, you will be disappointed.
There is no mining in this system, there is only the provision of
storage and computation. And, if you provide too much, if your presence
on the network becomes outsized, your profits will decline: this is the
power of the Kolaris pricing system. It is not a market-based system, it
is a mathematically-engineered command economoy system, decentralised
across every node on the network.

Finally, raising awareness. No matter how brilliant the technology, no
system can ever become useful if people don't know it exists. So
please, share this document, and share the ideas behind it. Tweet about it,
message your friends, and join our mailing list for updates about the
system itself (we will never, ever send you spam, and you can opt out at
any time).

The future of trust is in going forward boldly into a brave new world,
but it is our duty to ensure that in that world, we build a true
democracy, a true rule of the people, in which governments, companies,
and the powerful are not technically, but fundamentally beholden to the
will of the people.

So let's create the future of decentralisation, and the future of
trust, together. Join us.
